=== Document Analysis Result ===
FileName: Analytics Engineer - Marketing.pdf
File Type: .pdf
Size: 68588 bytes
Status: completed

=== Extracted Text ===
=) MoneyLion

Analytics Engineer - Marketing
About the Role

MoneyLion is on a mission to give every American the power to make their best financial decisions. A key
tenant of that mission is ensuring we are able to reach and onboard Americans looking to be empowered.

We are looking for a talented and driven Analytics Engineer to join our dynamic Marketing Analytics team.
As an Analytics Engineer, you will work at the intersection of marketing and technology to design, build,
and optimize data pipelines and tools that support key business decisions. You will leverage your technical
expertise to provide clean data sets to end users, modeling data in a way that empowers end users to
answer their own questions. You will partner with data scientists, analysts, and marketers to ensure our
data empowers us to optimize our marketing strategies and performance.

Key Responsibilities

e Work with the Director, Marketing Strategy & Analytics to define core marketing data architecture
and data priorities to support a data driven marketing organization.

e Operate as an owner - identify areas for improvement in the marketing data, tech stack, efficiency
of data models and dashboards.

e Liaise closely with data engineering to maintain scalable and reliable data pipelines that integrate
marketing data across multiple sources (CRM, advertising platforms, analytics tools, etc.).

e Work with cross-functional teams such as marketing, martech and data engineering to identify key
data needs and integrate the data from various marketing channels (e.g., paid search, social
media, email marketing) and ensure it is structured in a way that is easy to analyze and visualize.

e Collaborate with data analysts and business stakeholders to develop data models that support
marketing KPIs and metrics, such as customer acquisition cost (CAC), lifetime value (LTV),
conversion rates, and ROI.

e Develop and maintain proprietary in-house data models such as customer segmentation models
and marketing attribution that drive and influence business performance.

e Develop and maintain dashboards and reports to track key marketing performance indicators
(KPIs) and provide insights into campaign performance, customer behavior, and channel
effectiveness.

Provide guidance on proper data tagging, user tracking and event instrumentation.
Partner closely with marketing, data science, and engineering teams to ensure data needs are met,
and that marketing strategies are informed by accurate and timely data insights.

e Ensure that data quality standards are upheld and maintain a strong focus on robust
documentation.

e Train business teams on the adoption of key tools to nurture a “self-service” mindset from
business partners.

About You

e Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Engineering, BUsiness Analysis, Mathematics, Statistics
or related field.

e Minimum of 3+ years experience in analytics engineering, data engineering or similar technical
role.

e Experience working with marketing data, martech and business intelligence tools (i.e. amplitude,
Sisense).

Experience working in a fintech or financial services company is a plus.

Highly proficient in SQL; proficiency in python or another programming language for data
manipulation.

Familiarity with version control systems (e.g., Git).

Experience with dbt modeling, ETL and rETL.

Experience with Segment, Google Analytics, Google/Facebook Ads and CRM platforms (i.e. Braze,
Iterable) a plus.

A strong problem solver with experience overcoming ambiguity.

Demonstrated ability in managing multiple projects with a strong attention to detail.

High business acumen with a knack for how data can “fuel the business equation”.

Ability to transform complex data sets into clear, actionable insights for marketing teams and other
stakeholders.

Excellent communication skills with ability to explain technical concepts to non-technical
stakeholders.